General theory
===============

Second quantization
-------------------

The second quantization representation of electronic Hamiltonian and associated quantities in many cases provides a more straightforward and compact way to derive various wave function models than the conventional approach based on the direct application of Slater-Condon rules to individual Slater determinants.  For example, derivation of working equations for coupled-cluster singles and doubles wave function in second quantization becomes a single lecture affair, compared to the conventional way, which is several days undertaking. Thus, the second quantization is a valuable mathematical tool for working with correlated wave functions. 

The mathematical apparatus of second quantization is based on two key ingredients: the creation/annihilation operators and the definition of particle space on which these operators act. To define creation and annihilation operators acting on spin-orbital $\psi(\mathbf{x})$\footnote{Here, we use combined electron coordinate $\mathbf{x} = (\mathbf{r}, s)$ composed of spatial $\mathbf{r}$ and spin $s$ coordinates of electron.} we define Fock space, which is postulated to be abstract vector space of occupation vectors which uniquely maps to Slater determinants. To illustrate the concept of occupation number vector, let us consider Fock space consisting from three spin-orbitals: $\psi_1(\mathbf{x})$, $\psi_2(\mathbf{x})$, and $\psi_3(\mathbf{x})$. The Slater determinant for two electrons occupying $\psi_1(\mathbf{x})$, $\psi_2(\mathbf{x})$ spin-orbitals $1/\sqrt{2} |\psi_1(\mathbf{x}) \psi_2(\mathbf{x}) |$ in Fock space represented as occupation number vector $|\mathbf{k}\rangle = | 1 1 0 \rangle$. The Fock space is a linear vector space, and consequently has 
following properties: 

- two occupation number vectors $| \mathbf{k} \rangle$ and $| \mathbf{m} \rangle$ are orthogonal i.e., $\langle \mathbf{k} | \mathbf{m} \rangle = \delta_{\mathbf{k}, \mathbf{m}}$ 
-  occupation number vectors constitutes complete basis i.e. arbitrary vector $|\mathbf{g}\rangle$ can be expressed as linear combination of occupation number vectors

$$
| \mathbf{g} \rangle = \sum_\mathbf{k} c_\mathbf{k} | \mathbf{k} \rangle
$$
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;and outer product of occupation number vectors resolve to identity operator

$$
1 = \sum_\mathbf{k} | \mathbf{k} \rangle \langle  \mathbf{k} | 
$$

The Fock space consisting of $N$ spin orbitals, $F(N)$, can be partitioned into sub-spaces as 

$$
 F(N) = F(0,N) \oplus F(1,N) \oplus ... \oplus F(N,N) 
$$
where $F(M, N)$ is the set of occupation number vectors with $M$ occupied spin-orbitals. The Fock subspace $F(M,N)$ can be viewed as an $M$-electron wave function expressed in occupation number vectors, as it contains all Slater determinant generated by distributing $M$ electrons in $N$ spin orbitals. Among the Fock subspaces, the F(0, N) subspace corresponds to a completely unoccupied Slater determinant and is called a vacuum 
state $| vac \rangle$. The vacuum state has the following properties

$$
| vac \rangle = | 0_1, 0_2, ..., 0_N \rangle  \ \mathrm{and} \ \langle vac | vac \rangle = 1 \ .   
$$
After introducing Fock space, the creation and annihilation operators can be defined as operators, creating and destroying electrons in specific spin-orbital. In terms of occupation vector manipulation, these actions are described

- creation operator $a_p^\dagger$: 

$$
 a_p^\dagger | \mathbf{k} \rangle = \delta_{k_p, 0} \prod_{i = 1}^{p} (-1)^{k_p} | k_1 k_2...1_p ...k_N \rangle 
$$

- annihilation operator $a_p$: 

$$
 a_p | \mathbf{k} \rangle = \delta_{k_p, 1} \prod_{i = 1}^{p} (-1)^{k_p} | k_1 k_2...0_p ...k_N \rangle 
$$

With $\prod_{i = 1}^{p} (-1)^{k_p}$ the phase factor ensuring the antisymmetry of the wavefunction. This phase factor is a direct consequence of the anti-commutator relationship of the creation and annihilation operators: 
%
\begin{eqnarray}
a_p^\dagger a_q +  a_q a_p^\dagger &=& \delta_{p,q}  \ ,  \\ 
a_p^\dagger a_q^\dagger +  a_q^\dagger a_p^\dagger &=& 0 \ ,  \\
a_p a_q +  a_q a_p &=& \delta_{p,q} \ , 
\end{eqnarray}

which are primary tools to manipulate occupation number vectors. Using the above definitions of creation and annihilation operators, the electronic Hamiltonian can be defined as 

$$
\hat H = \sum_{pq} h_{pq} a_p^\dagger a_q + \frac{1}{2} \sum_{pqrs} g_{pqrs} a_p^\dagger a_q a_r^\dagger a_s \ , 
$$

where $h_{pq}$ is the one-electron part of electronic Hamiltonian 

$$
 h_{pq} = \int \psi_p(\mathbf{x})^* \bigg \{ - \frac{1}{2} \nabla^2 - \sum_K \frac{Z_k}{|\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{R}_K |} \bigg \} \psi_q(\mathbf{x}) d \mathbf{x} \ , 
$$

and $g_{pqrs}$ is the two-electron part of electronic Hamiltonian 

$$
g_{pqrs} = \int \int \psi_p(\mathbf{x})^* \psi_r(\mathbf{x}')^* \frac{1}{|\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{r}'|} \psi_q(\mathbf{x}) \psi_s(\mathbf{x}') d \mathbf{x} d \mathbf{x}' 
$$


Electron correlation
--------------------
The electron correlation describes instantaneous interaction between electrons in a molecular system. This interaction manifests itself as a relationship between one- and two-electron density matrices 

$$
\rho(\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{r}') \neq \rho(\mathbf{r}) \rho(\mathbf{r}')
$$

where $\rho(\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{r}')$ is the two-electron density. If the molecular system is described by the wave function model, which does not permit instantaneous electron interaction, the relationship between density matrices becomes 

$$
\rho(\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{r}') = \rho(\mathbf{r}) \rho(\mathbf{r}')
$$

indicating completely independent motion of electron in the molecular system. The electron correlation arises from two primary sources fermionic nature of electrons and interaction between electrons. From the perspective of the Hartree-Fock method,  the fermionic nature of electrons is accounted for by the construction of wave function from a single Slater determinant, and the latter source of electron correlation is neglected by introducing effective Coulomb interaction between electrons. The ability of the wave function model to describe electron correlation can be quantified via electron correlation energy $E_{corr}$, which is defined following Löwdin {cite:p}`Lowdin1980` as  

$$
E_{corr} = E_{WF} - E_{HF} \ , 
$$
where $E_{WF}$ is the energy of the molecular system computed by the selected wave function model, $E_{HF}$ is the energy of the molecular system computed using the Hartree-Fock method.  



Integral transformation techniques
-------------------

Most correlated wavefunction theories rely on the integrals in the molecular orbital basis. For some methods, like Møller-Plesset second order perturbation theory, this step is even the most time-consuming step of the calculation.

Conventionally, this is done by transforming the atomic orbital integrals (a four-dimensional tensor) to molecular basis. For example the $\langle ij|ab \rangle$ integrals can be obtained via
%
\begin{eqnarray}
\langle \mu \nu|\lambda b \rangle &= \sum_{\sigma} C_{\sigma b} \langle \mu \nu | \lambda \sigma \rangle \\
\langle \mu \nu|a b \rangle &= \sum_{\lambda} C_{\lambda a} \langle \mu \nu | \lambda b \rangle \\
\langle \mu j|a b \rangle &= \sum_{\nu} C_{\nu j} \langle \mu \nu | a b \rangle \\
\langle i j|a b \rangle &= \sum_{\mu} C_{\mu i} \langle \mu j | a b \rangle
\end{eqnarray}
%
where $\mu$, $\nu$, $\lambda$ and $\sigma$ denote the atomic orbitals.
The computational cost of this procedure is $O(N^5)$, since each summation involves five indices. Note that the intermediate result of the transformation needs to be explicitly stored in memory. This can be demanding as the required memory increases as $O(N^4)$ where $N$ is the number of contracted basis functions.

An alternative way of getting the molecular orbital integrals is through the direct formation of many Fock matrices. Taking the $\langle ij|ab \rangle$ integrals as an example, we can in practice build $N_{occ} \times N_{occ}$ density matrices using the coefficients of the occupied orbitals, and form the corresponding Fock matrices that can then be transformed into molecular basis by the coefficients of the virtual orbitals. 
%
\begin{eqnarray}
D^{ij}_{\mu \nu} &= C_{\mu i} C_{\nu j} \\
K^{ij}_{\lambda \sigma} &= \sum_{\mu\nu} \langle \mu \nu| \lambda \sigma \rangle D^{ij}_{\mu\nu} \\
\langle ij|ab \rangle &= \sum_{\lambda \sigma} C_{\lambda a} K^{ij}_{\lambda \sigma} C_{\sigma b}
\end{eqnarray}
%
The computational cost of this approach is formally $O(N^6)$; however, in practice the cost scales between $O(N^4)$ and $O(N^5)$ due to screening of integrals in the formation of Fock matrices. An advantage of this approach is that the Fock matrices can be computed and stored on individual compute nodes, making it suitable for large-scale parallelization on HPC systems.
