# Polarizable embedding

## Subsystems and coupling
In recent years, the hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) methods have become a rather widely used approach for 
modeling molecules' electronic structure in complex environments.  Most QM/MM methods partition the molecular system into a small 
QM region (up to few hundreds of atoms) and a large MM region (thousands of atoms). Full or partial coupling in intermolecular 
interactions (electrostatics, induction, dispersion, short-range repulsion) is accounted for between the QM and MM parts of the 
system, where each interaction acts both ways. Non-polarizable or polarizable force fields typically describe the MM part with 
parameters (point charges, distributed polarizabilities) determined empirically or using quantum chemistry methods. For bonded systems, 
the MM part of the system's residues is often subject to bond capping, and the QM and MM parts interface to approximations like 
atom in-linking.  After partitioning the molecular system into QM and MM regions and selecting interaction mode between these 
systems, the electronic wave function of the QM system can be determined by solving the wave function model specific equation 
in the presence of external potential generated by the MM region. 

To illustrate this concept, here we consider the QM/MM version of the Kohn--Sham method. The total energy of the molecular system in the KS/MM method is partitioned into three contributions:  

\begin{equation}
\label{eq:e_qmmm}
E = E_\mathrm{MM} + E_\mathrm{MM/QM} + E_\mathrm{QM} \ , 
\end{equation}

where the first term is the energy of the MM region, the second term is the interaction energy of the QM and MM regions, and 
the last term is the QM region energy. Assuming a polarizable force field describes MM region, the second term  in Eq. \ref{eq:e_qmmm} 
can be expanded as 

\begin{equation}
E_\mathrm{MM/QM} =  \sum_i q_i^\mathrm{perm} (\phi_{i}^\mathrm{ele}+ \phi_{i}^{nuc} )   +   \sum_i \mathbf{p}_i^\mathrm{ind} (\mathbf{E}_{i}^\mathrm{ele}+ \mathbf{E}_{i}^\mathrm{nuc} )  \ ,
\end{equation}

where $\{ q_i^\mathrm{perm}\}$ is the set of permanent charges in MM region, $\{\mathbf{p}_i^{ind}\}$ is the set of induced dipoles in MM region, the $\phi_{i}^\mathrm{ele}$ and $\phi_{i}^\mathrm{nuc}$ are potential components are generated by electrons and nuclei in MM region,  $\mathbf{E}_{i}^\mathrm{ele}$ and $\mathbf{E}_{i}^\mathrm{nuc}$ are potential components are generated by electrons and nuclei in MM region. The $E_\mathrm{MM/QM}$ converts to additional contribution to external potential $v(\mathbf{r})$ Kohn--Sham equations (see Eq.~\eqref{eq:ksao})

\begin{equation}
\mathbf{V}_\mathrm{MM/QM}(\mathbf{C})_{\mu\nu}  = \int \phi_{\mu} (\mathbf{r}, s)^* \{ 
 \sum_i q_i^\mathrm{perm} T_i^q(\mathbf{r})   +   \sum_i \mathbf{p}_i^\mathrm{ind} T_i^m(\mathbf{r})) \} \phi_{\mu} (\mathbf{r}, s) d \mathbf{r} d s ,  
\end{equation}

where $T_i^q(\mathbf{r})$ and $T_i^m(\mathbf{r}))$ electrostatic interaction tensors of first and second order. In the above equation, induced dipoles in the MM region explicitly depend on electron density in the QM region and thus need to be determined for each step of the SCF procedure. Furthermore, the induced dipoles are the only MM region contribution explicitly entering response calculations of molecular properties and consequently account for this contribution is crucial in any QM/MM  calculations of spectroscopic properties.

## Electron spill-out and exchange repulsion

## Environment fragmentation

## LoProp and embedding paramaters

## Local field factors and intensities

## Exercises
